doc: add stdenv passthru chapter (#315909)
NixOS/nixpkgs: doc/stdenv/passthru.chapter.md

# Passthru-attributes {#chap-passthru}
[]{#var-stdenv-passthru} []{#special-variables} <!-- legacy anchors -->

`passthru` is an attribute set which can be filled with arbitrary values.
For example:

```nix
{
  passthru = {
    foo = "bar";
    baz = {
      value1 = 4;
      value2 = 5;
    };
  };
}
```

> Much of the passthru's power comes from two features:
> - You can access passthru attributes as if they were set inside a derivation (e.g. `hello.baz.value1`).
> - These values are not passed to the builder, so you can change them without triggering a rebuild.

Reviewer: A  better wording:

```suggestion
The interesting properties of `passthru` are:
- Similar to `meta` attributes, they convey information about the derivation without triggering a rebuild.
- Attributes inside `passthru` are directly accessible as if they were set inside the derivation. E.g. in the example above, `hello.baz.value1 + hello.baz.value2` returns `9`.

The properties above make `passthru` a powerful tool to provide information about the derivation to the outside world.
```

One example of the passthru's power is how it enables us to associate the package for an interpreter Python or Ruby with a set of modules built for that specific interpreter (e.g., `python.pkgs` and `ruby.gems`) and to build runtime environments with a collection of those modules (e.g., (`python.withPackages`)[#python.withpackages-function] and `ruby.withPackages`).

> <!-- python.pkgs, ruby.gems, and ruby.withPackages are mentioned but don't have dedicated sections to link -->

Author: Comment here is just a reminder for why I only linked one of these :)

Reviewer 2: Is this trying to say that `python.pkgs` and `python.withPackages` are defined in `python.passthru`? If so it should be explicit.

Author: @kjeremy Can you clarify how that could be more explicit? (Perhaps in the form of a rephrasing? I feel like the text is already explicitly stating that the passthru is where these are defined.)

::: {.note}
Since `passthru` is meant for values that are useful outside the derivation (e.g. in other derivations), it has no strict schema.
:::

<!-- 
I'm extracting this statement from the old text because I feel like it isn't very clearly-phrased and doesn't help connect with something most people know already.
I still think we should try to make sure the pattern it models is represented in the list of common attributes, though:

> convey a specific dependency of your derivation which contains a program with plugins support. 

Author: Still undecided on this. Roughly a TODO, but I didn't want to go off searching for a real example of this and writing it up if all of this is off-base in the first place.

Later, others who make derivations with plugins can use passed-through dependency to ensure that their plugin would be binary-compatible with built program. 

> -->

Author: Still undecided on this. Roughly a TODO, but I didn't want to go off searching for a real example of this and writing it up if all of this is off-base in the first place.

## Common passthru-attributes {#sec-common-passthru-attributes}

Many `passthru` attributes are situational, so this section only attempts to list recurring attributes and patterns. 
Very broadly, passthru attributes listed here fall in one of these categories:
<!-- 
Very broadly, an attribute is worth documenting here if it fits either description below.
Attributes that apply only to a single builder or language ecosystem are best documented alongside the builder or related docs.
-->

- Attributes that are (at least in theory) globally relevant--you could find them on any derivation in nixpkgs (generally because they don't entail any special support be built into the derivation they're added to). 
  Common examples of this type are `passthru.tests` and `passthru.updateScript`.
- Common patterns for adding extra functionality to a derivation (which do tend to entail building support into the derivation or its passthru). 

>   Common examples of this type are `passthru.optional-dependencies`, `passthru.withPlugins`, and `passthru.withPackages`.

Author: @fricklerhandwerk Could use guidance on this implementation of the razor and whether you think it belongs in the primary text or in a comment.

One example of the passthru's power is how it enables us to associate the package for an interpreter Python or Ruby with a set of modules built for that specific interpreter (e.g., `python.pkgs` and `ruby.gems`) and to build runtime environments with a collection of those modules (e.g., (`python.withPackages`)[#python.withpackages-function] and `ruby.withPackages`).
<!-- python.pkgs, ruby.gems, and ruby.withPackages are mentioned but don't have dedicated sections to link -->

::: {.note}
Since `passthru` is meant for values that are useful outside the derivation (e.g. in other derivations), it has no strict schema.
:::

<!--
I'm extracting this statement from the old text because I feel like it isn't very clearly-phrased and doesn't help connect with something most people know already.
I still think we should try to make sure the pattern it models is represented in the list of common attributes, though:

convey a specific dependency of your derivation which contains a program with plugins support.
Later, others who make derivations with plugins can use passed-through dependency to ensure that their plugin would be binary-compatible with built program.
-->

> ## Common passthru-attributes {#sec-common-passthru-attributes}

Reviewer 3: With the [new convention](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/pull/245243), I think this entire section should go into `pkgs/README.md` instead, because it's only useful to Nixpkgs contributors. Though one could also argue that the attributes are _exposed_ to users, so they could use it, but that's really not the intention behind these.

And it seems like this would combine well with https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/tree/master/pkgs#package-tests. I never got around to doing this in the original PR, but it would be great to continue going that route!

Author: This PR is roughly intended to force this sort of decision. (My primary goal here is that we find clarity on whether and to what extent the passthru should be documented in the manual and/or repo-internal docs and end up with a razor sharp enough to look at a given attr and decide whether/where to document it). 

As long as we leave with that razor in hand, I won't put out if the result is that we close this PR and do something else.

CC: @roberth, since this PR results from discussion with him.
